# Session 3 lecture notes

## Announcements

### class format 10 mins

Focus on posting all material on-line , including walkthroughs and tutorials.    Last week I posted a video and tutorial on using VM I made.  I am behind on session schedule but hope the materials are helpfl 

This week I just posted links to storage exercies from Microsoft, that would be good to go through next week. 

If at any time these are missing something or you have questions, please contact us.   

I am posting resources with the goal of providing the context for services that I wish I had  when I was learning cloud

I'm posting perhaps too much so take what makes sense to learn what you need, in the time you have.   I wish I could give each of you a 

For example, I struggled to write  scripts that copy data from our HPC to Azure Files myself, so this week I'm writing a tutorial for you on that. However I realized there eah, you need a Token, so I have to describe authentication which leads to the topic of Identity Management and cloud and tell them to ignore stuff about Managed Identities, etc etc.   The teachers that are hear who distill complex topic to salient points know the issue... the beginning is the hardest place for cloud

### other resources for learning 10 min

That said, I discovered another resource for learning from Microsoft, published June 2021 that I put in the 'references' page: cloud for researchers

I added a link to the lesson on storage on Session #3. 

It's not strictly for researchers, for example there is a heading "Production database server"  "for your prescription drug stocks."     I don't suggest running your own database server to keep track of your drugs unless you are running a pharmacy.  I've done it and it's a ton of work I'd rather spend _using_ the database server to get answers from my data.  Now with the cloud, you can just turn on a database server and start using it in 10 minutes. 

The path you take to get to cloud is up to you, and you don't need to go thorugh all of my materials.  I am creating them because I find the azure documentation full of unnecessary elements and IT Jargon. SEcond there are references to older products they don't use, new products they are trying to sell you, and rebranded products that are just confusing.  Like I don't even know what Azure Synapse is but they keep telling me I should use it.    Second most cloud tutorials are geared for IT Professionals and as researcher you are focused on data and science.   

Ask Mahmoud comment on finding documentation on line...

## About Projects 

Mahmoud... (record this)


## Lecture on Cloud.   25 minutes

goal today is to learn about different kinds of storage, next seesion will be about moving data 
Slides 20

## Notes on Book Chapter 2 on Storage 

Ch2 is a bit rambly and goes into details that aren't important for your projects unless you want details of are doing HPC scientific software

### data formats and object store details

Many well-established research communities rely on the formats like HDF5 and NetCDF and there is no adequate translation in cloud.  for most of us the details are not important.  The point is the same that Mahmoud made in his white paper: translation from research computing facilities like HPC to cloud is not straightforward

### Object store and metadata

Blob storage is object storage, so is S3 on Amazon Web Services.  the chapter mentions you can't search them - you have to know the ID of a file to retrieve it. Also there are no folders.  Azure has added features to help with this, namely metadata, indexing and a full-test search service, and virtualized folders.  


On a standard file system, we use folders to help with this, sometimes many levels deep 

For azure Blob storage you have

StorageAcct/Container/blobname and blobname can be "fakefolder/blobname.ext"


second and their new "data lake" service or "heirarchical namespace" has many features for metadata as well as versioning and 'zones'   the "data lake" concept is designed for teams or institutions with huge nubmers of diverse files to store.   I am just learning it

### Databases

This chapter is about storage, and yet it talks about databases.   We will cover data systems in general in a later session, but databases are an execellent alternative for storing tabular or highly structured data and in fact can solve many "out of memory" problems for code

Databases can be based on existing products (including open source) traditional installed 'on premise' but that cloud vendors now sell and even re-brand  You turn on and manage the database server as a service

"NoSQL" is a 
Cloud companies have "global scale" database products to store enormous tables and query in seconds.   We will help distinquish between these options



Warehouse Analytics:  MSU like many complex institutions uses a huge data warehouse to analyze business data and reconcile them.  It's unlikely that a research group would employ this technology, not just because commercial products are very expensive. 



## concepts 

Service levels and spectrum of management

we are in the "infrastructure" phase of learning cloud, and storage and VMs are building blocks

Many cloud projects may not use VMs, but nearly all should use storage. 

We will get to other cloud services that 


## command line use of Azure

we don't require using the command line for project and for this short fellowship it's no appropraite to expect it for those unfamiliar. 

I added an extra ptho
however, I'm considering a special session for those who want to learn it, and would like extra demonstration to get started. we can tailor this for the CLI (e.g. terminal), Python or R depending on who is interested. 
