# Session 1: Introduction to the Cloud : Ezra Brooks 2020

## Welcome

Brian O’Shea: Welcome, introductions, basic guidelines & expectations

Participants introduce themselves to the group (Name, department, research interests)

## Intro: High Level Overview

### A. Overview:

 - What is the cloud?
 - First impressions
 - What does it mean to do research in the cloud?
 - This is not HPCC / This is not like working on a traditional PC

### B. Thoughts/reflections on the initial reading

### C. Introduce concept of “services” as components

 -	For research: storage, functions, VM, domain-specific tools (SQL, ML, NLP, etc.)
 -	Other: web, API, workflow management, data munging / cleaning, etc.
 -	Language tools: R and Python

### D. Successful cloud management also requires:

 - Domain knowledge of specific services (eg web, NLP, etc)
 - Strategic understanding of cost models
 - Familiarity with the “cloudy” way of doing things (microservices, serverless, etc.)
### E. Our goals right now are:
 - Get comfortable with configuring basic services
 - Understand how to plan a research project in the cloud
 - Basic knowledge of admin tasks like reviewing cost, security, and config mgmt

	F.  Microsoft Teams
post files, help, announcements, etc.
Web or desktop app

## Mahmoud Parvizi
 - Past experience & current role
 - Cloud facilitator
 - Participant in first Fellowship cohort

---
####### 10 min BREAK ########
---

## Technical Walkthrough (follow along)

### Working in the cloud means designing, testing, and tuning different components for your project.

Three ways:

 - Web Portal
 - Desktop Apps (for some tasks)
 - and programmatic techniques → gitlab, command line, python/R libraries, etc.

We’ll start working in the portal, and introduce the other methods as appropriate

    1. Start by logging in. [confirm everyone can access Subscription]
    
    2. Log in. What is the interface like? How to find things. Where are docs? etc.
    
    3. Create your resource group (also, what is a resource group?)
    
    4. Search for services.
    
    5. We all need storage, so let’s create a storage account

Lots of different types of storage services; today: blob container
Always review cost prior to creating service (where to learn more)

Upload and download sample data (and introduce az storage gui tool)

Install GUI tool

Sample data in Teams → General > Files > cars.csv

See uploaded file in GUI

Return to main portal page to review active resource usage & cost reports

[5 min BREAK]
---

## 4. Discussion

 - Thoughts about the initial reading?
 - What are your expectations based on today? What do you especially want to learn about?
 - What is different from what you expected?
 - What is concerning, confusing, or unclear?
 - Other questions…?




## 5. Review for next time:

Readings
Part II
Intro, Chs 4-5 essential
Remaining chapters -- skim

-- make notes about questions/what to discuss & share before next time

Post responses in Teams (can be free form, a few sentences, etc.)
To help guide future discussions


Read about other storage types -- point to docs

Practice assignment -- create additional containers, delete containers, upload and download file

Create some other types of storage containers; try to upload and download data; can delete services when finished. [link to docs]

Read about the different types of storage and consider which might be useful for you


Refine project plan based on today’s discussion. Specifically: try to break down the workflow down into pieces. What type of components or services do you think you will need? What are the stages of the work? What needs to happen once? What is repeated? What is the volume of data? Is it high performance / high throughput? Etc.
