# Session 1: Introduction Teacher Notes

## Goals:
    syllabus 
        get orienteed to course, 
        discuss expectations and flow
        how projects will work 
    
    big picture of what it is: Parvizi 21 & NIST
        learning how to learn about cloud

    understand important aspects of cloud computing: 

        interaction & workflow
        what might seem approppriate may not be
        spoiled for choice
        costs
        security



### Note about content of the first meeting: 
    - in 2020 the course started in October, which gave students time to prep
    - in 2021 we are opening the class 1 week prior, and concurrent with start of semester (a busy time).  

## Ezra outline: 

### Overview:

 - What is the cloud?
 - First impressions
 - What does it mean to do research in the cloud?
 - This is not HPCC / This is not like working on a traditional PC


### Introduce concept of “services” as components

 -	For research: storage, functions, VM, domain-specific tools (SQL, ML, NLP, etc.)
 -	Other: web, API, workflow management, data munging / cleaning, etc.
 -	Language tools: R and Python

### D. Successful cloud management also requires:

 - Domain knowledge of specific services (eg web, NLP, etc)
 - Strategic understanding of cost models
 - Familiarity with the “cloudy” way of doing things (microservices, serverless, etc.)
### E. Our goals right now are:
 - Get comfortable with configuring basic services
 - Understand how to plan a research project in the cloud
 - Basic knowledge of admin tasks like reviewing cost, security, and config mgmt
 - 
 - 
## Class meterials opening:
    email cohort
        link to website
        list of expectations == see website 
        first meeting time / place / remote
        primary responsibility = do pre-class work and email back when done, or if there are issues

## About level of content for intro

how much async?
    get setup and connected to communications
    read Mahmoud's paper and introductory chapter
    video/lecture from Pat about cloud computing
    
what does that leave for sync?
    - intro from program director(s)
    - saying high from Pat and Mahmoud
    - if I do pre-class lecture, how to work through the content of that?
        discussion prompts?



## Lecture 

  learning how to learn about cloud
        cloud perceptions vantage points: Infrastructure person, Developer, Business Person, govt, reseachers
            how that affects our understanding and how to learn
            the conceptual model depense on your approach, and training materials do not consider this
            What does that mean for Researchers?  There is very little written from our vantage point

    understand important aspects of cloud computing: 

        interaction & workflow
        what might seem approppriate may not be
        spoiled for choice
        costs
        security


  
when Parvizi mentions " distinct feature of cloud analytics services is the pre-built platform to ..." means a bundled service. 

example of bundled service : Big Data Platform "Apache Spark"

what is it ?  parallel data analysis using clusters and workflow.   Aggregates smaller (cheaper) hardware in a cluster for very very large storag eand very very large processing.  How large?  Billions or Trillions of rows  of data.   Spark is open source - aanyone caana install aand use it. 

options for using an open source data system: 
buy some computers, instaall OS, networking, etc etc when thata's ready install data system on top and manage users.  If ussers == your lab then this is possible.  you are responsible for aaall aspects including security

install spark on someone else collection of computers (ee.g. an HPC) which cana be diff becvause it's not your computer (lack of admin rights)

pay for IAAS : vm, neetworks, etc on cloud and install OS and manage thee daata system on that.   $$$ but total control.   I hope you weren't aalso trying to write a dissertation

bundle: the company builds the whole system based on open source software and charges you more for that.  you just have to use it.   It comees with limitations but you can start using it now

platform: the company sells a services for a specific applicatioan like processing audio , it's based on an open source spark but they make it really easy to use ofr rthiss pupose

innovation:  the cloud company takes the idea of this data system, and makes a whole new product that is based on (and may look like) the open source product but is vey different, and often "cloud scale"  AWS Aurora is an examaple. MySQL-like but very big.      

example: HPC

DIY: download Linux and Slurm, buy hardware and networking install the whole thing, OS, libs, drives, software, and run it in your lab

Institutional:   let the experts do that, and you justinstlal the softwae you ned and run

Cloud:  mimics an institutional HPC but you provision the parts you need on demand.   Can then run single lab's 100K core job.  Very expensive but cheaper than buying you own HPC.  




