## Installation and config notes for a VM that students can use

( this is not part of the website)

The MS DSVM sounds cool but there is no great way to connect until you do a bunch of other stuff. 
 
- remote X destkop that's install wants you to install a special X client on laptop
- remote desktop .. does that even work on dsvm?
- Restudio server that's installed is disabled and then won't even start.  It's an old version.
    - the latest version of rstudio server on the website does not start, linked against the wrong libssl for ubnutu 18
    - this one did work : rstudio-server-1.4.673-amd64.deb
    - after installing had restart to take it 'on-line' and maybe even enabled it 
        - `sudo systemctl enable rstudio-server`
        - `sudo rstudio-server online`   I don't know if this survives reboots
    - had to log-in with system userid/pw
    
- jupyter hub is up and running but on https with self-signed cert !  long insructions on installing our own cert. 

if there is a ton of stuff to fix or install to use it after creation, you don't want to delete it.  Then it's not useable for one-off analysis.  it becomes a pet, not cattle.  useless for research IT. 

can we make a VM that has similar things install but 'turnkey' OR with scripts to fix this stuff.  

Rstudio install on Unbuntu 18 (common vm)

```bash
sudo apt-key adv --keyserver keyserver.ubuntu.com --recv-keys E298A3A825C0D65DFD57CBB651716619E084DAB9
sudo add-apt-repository 'deb https://cloud.r-project.org/bin/linux/ubuntu bionic-cran40/'
sudo apt update
sudo apt-get install gdebi-core r-base
curl -O https://s3.amazonaws.com/rstudio-ide-build/server/bionic/amd64/rstudio-server-1.4.673-amd64.deb
gdebi rstudio-server-1.4.673-amd64.deb
# needed?
# sudo systemctl enable rstudio-server
sudo rstudio-server online
```

Another method for a remote desktop: 

Installing VNC on an ubunut VM:  https://microsoft.github.io/AzureTipsAndTricks/blog/tip235.html

Open the firewall to this port but just for the users IP address

 - get your IP address
 - 
Windows will be required to install a VNC client https://www.tightvnc.com

MacOS comes with :

open /System/Library/CoreServices/Applications/Screen\ Sharing.app

Or 

/System/Library/CoreServices/Applications/Screen\ Sharing.app/Contents/MacOS/Screen\ Sharing 

 

Another option: we create a disk that they can use
 1) shows that if we can do it, they can do it
 2) we learn how to use disks
 3) we can install what we want since DSVM is mostly hype
 4) lots of work!

Need: 

easy way to connect 
    - web interface program (jupyter hub, Rstudio, ssh, RDP?)
activity

    - download download 
        - use a browser or curl
    - 
    - 
web interface that can be started automatically 
    R studio, pre-setup, with user accounts?
    

"snack-tivity" bite sized and not very satistfying

bare min linux: linux with ssh log-in
    users: command line capable (advanced)
    activity: log-in and download a file?
    follow up:  if you are familiar with CLI, what is next?  setting up env to run your program

bare min Windows: create a windows computer and log-in
        



    


